# Single-cell Quantitative Trait Loci (scQTLs)
To evaluate the association between genotypic variation and gene expression variation within distinct cell types, we used snRNA-seq data to identify cis-eQTLs within 17 distinct cell types (“scQTLs”). To do so, we first merged genotype, UMI expression, and covariate data across all cohorts considered in our study. Within this merged cohort, we excluded any samples meeting the following criteria:
- Some samples were duplicated across different cohorts; we took one instance of such samples to avoid data redundancy in our analysis.
- Samples missing genotype data were excluded.
- We excluded any samples with missing covariates.
For each cell type, we first generated pseudo-bulk matrices by averaging the UMI counts across all nuclei within a given sample for that cell type. For a given individual to be included in the pseudobulk matrix of a given cell type, we enforced that the cell type must be represented by >50 nuclei. Additionally, we enforced that each individual must have >300 nuclei in total. We then normalized the psuedobulk expression matrix for each cell type by performing a log(CPM+1) transformation. We filtered out lowly expressed genes by removing genes in which the fraction of samples with non-0 expression is ≤10%. These filtered matrices were then used as the psuedobulk expression matrices for our scQTL analyses. For genotype data, we removed all variants with MAF<0.05 from the uniformly processed imputed genotypes.

We followed the same general procedure as that adopted by [GTEx](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz1776). By using a 1 MB cis window up- and downstream of the TSS of each gene, we implemented [QTLtools](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15452) using biological sex, age, diagnosis, cohort, five genotype PCs (to control for ancestry), and 100 expression PCs as covariates (to control for hidden batch effects). We used 100 expression PCs in particular, as this was found to optimize the total number of significant eGenes across cell types. Further details are provided in the paper.

